You need to understand this the breath.
This idea that breath is about taking in oxygen. This must go.
That is only a secondary purpose of the breath
for you to understand right now instead of seeing that I am
going to get some O2.
Whenever. You never seen the O,
have you?
You never seen the O. So instead of thinking like that, I want
you to think
in terms of
your life is happening only because of this.
The atmosphere outside
is your external lung
only because it pumps in and pumps out, not because this
pumps in, because that's pumping and pumping out. This is
happening
now.
The whole planet and its energies are doing that.
The planet is not taking in oxygen from the outer space, but
still this is happening.
So its not about you taking in an oxygen and letting it out.
It is a common thing for people who are in any kind of yogic
practice. Even if you are just doing asanas, it is very common
that when you come to relaxation, it is not only about
yogic practice, but anybody who is capable of bringing
themselves to a certain state of relaxation.
They will always notice there are moments in their life when
they don't need to breathe.
It is just that How long can you make that moment that may be
different from person to person because your relaxation,
relaxation itself is momentary.
Have you ever remained like a certain moment? You are lying
down.
You don't remain there the next moment
something its active. Have you noticed in Shunya meditation
when you simply become like this breath is almost not there.
Ohh, I am not breathing.
Starts breathing.
So when you say I am not breathing, your body is not
taking instructions from you on breathing.
It is just that the relaxation is gone now because mentally you
beginning to become active once activity comes.
Its very normal even if you are in physical activity. If you are
extremely relaxed,
many times the breath is like that. You almost have to move
it. Otherwise its just like that. It doesn't go by itself.
You will see.
Ah,
I don't know if you see people like that, but I see people
see these athletes and people who
who are doing some physical activity for high stakes.
They are trying to bring that moment where their breath is.
They are trying to
knowingly. He wants to do Ujjayi and come to a certain level of
relaxation where it sits like this. There is one moment of he
wants to start off at that moment.
Have you noticed this? What do you think they are trying to do?
What is it so if you want to wait, fame, metabolic activity
has to be high for you to jump into action. You must do.
No. They are trying to bring it down, isn't it?
Because somewhere, anybody who is in a high state of
performance is under the understanding that that moment
of relaxation is the basis of all activity.
If activity has to be very penetrative, if your action has
to have a certain level of penetration, you must have a
certain level of relaxation.
Otherwise, it's not going to
happen. You must see,
you know there is a few meditators in India who are
sharp shooters, who are shooting people, whose for sport,
they have one of your medals and one of them almost entered
Olympics and all that. So you should see the way they do
constantly.
I asked them, Who trained you like this?
Nobody trained them like that.
It's just that it's natural.
When they want to bring them, they themselves to that level of
relaxation where everything is chill naturally. They using the
breath. So breath is not just about taking in oxygen and
living out carbon dioxide. That is something that is happening
anyway.
That is, that is one of the functions. Breath is acting as a
carrier,
but there is something called as breath which is beyond the air
that you breathe,
which is what yoga is referring to a school Munadi.
So when we do any kind of conscious breathing processes
like Kriya's and Paniyon, we are trying to activate the tornado.
Our interest is not taking in more oxygen as all kinds of non
practicing yogis are writing books about.
Yes, taking in oxygen does its own things. But to take in
oxygen you don't have to do yoga.
If you climb mountain, you will take a lot of oxygen.
If you go play tennis, you will take lot of oxygen. You go play
soccer, you will take plenty of oxygen. OK,
you don't have to sit and do yoga to take an oxygen. It's
quite a boring thing.
If you don't touch another dimension, it's quite a boring
thing
playing a game. Isn't it much better?
What
Erase. You can say yes it's alright, I am a Yogi. But you
can say yes. It is a boring thing. Only if you use it as a
means to touch another dimension. Then it's something
else to take in oxygen. Doing yoga is an utterly boring thing.
You can go play a game plan mountain swim,
so your breath has to be conscious and its at a certain
place,
whatever the other aspects of it, the various other aspects to
it in terms of physiological benefits, psychological
benefits, spiritual dimension to it. But one simple aspect is
if this dimension which is the link between the physical body
and the non physical dimension which is a very source of
creation. If this becomes a strong force by itself,
you and that not the physical, the physicality of who you are,
the psychological structure which you call as myself, and
that dimension which is a source of all this, will naturally be
connected all the time. The idea is that Divine is not an idea in
your life. Divine is not a belief in your life. Divine is a
living presence in your life.
So we have to strengthen the subtle body, Not taking in more
oxygen,
are not letting your breath go out its own thing.
For many of you if you meditate, if you do certain things, there
may be a tendency for the breath to go away to its own level I
think which has been stabilised.
Now there many other people you
will see who will come and sit the 3 weeks sadhana. Another
people, if little something experience happens, breath
becomes like this.
Now that has been that is one basic thing that we have been
trying to change in the last 3
months that if something touches
you, you become still, you don't become
this,
Is it beginning to happen or not for sure its happening.
When I look you look at you beyond your physical structure,
it is distinctly there, OK. So that is the basis of sadhana.
That is the basis of being here and doing the needed sadhana.
That is the basis of doing lifelong sadhana. So that these
3 dimension are are well integrated and connected on a
moment to moment basis. Its not like once. In a way there is
some experience for us.
We are not looking for highs.
We are looking for a constant contact with the dimension.
Only then it finds expression
in the way you live, in the way you exist, in the way you can do
things, in everything its fines.
Expression not otherwise
divine is incapable of laying a road.
When we say
we are on a spiritual path, what we are doing is we are laying up
pathway because divine has no hands and legs.
Quite incapable he is, except for creation.
Isn't this? Can you eat a banana?
You can produce one. Can eat one? No,
you can create a banana but he cant eat one isn't it?
So this is what I meant by saying
if you go on a certain dimension, now you are asking
you want to move further. If you go on a certain dimension, now
there is only transmission, No transaction.
Divine can produce a banana, can produce an apple, can produce
everything but
cannot eat.
So when we say Brahmacharya this is what we are saying. He is on
the path of the divine. That means he only does this. He
cannot do this. If he does that, he will pay.
Understand what I'm saying?
That is why it's called
Brahmacharya, which literally
means he is on the path of the divine. He can only transmit. He
cannot transact.
There is no transaction with the divine only transmission isn't
another way to exist
for which there is no
explanation or substitute.